# HackRPI

The core idea behind our project is that Uber data exhibits periodic patterns, and is therefore predictable by machine learning algorithms. Using publicly available Uber data from over from ~4.5 million rides in the Greater NYC area from April-September 2014 (most recent data available in that area) we constructed a random forest regression model that predicted the likely ride requests given the time of day and the day of week. The model correctly predicted latitude and longitude to within a mean-squared error of 0.000842 and 0.00274 degrees, respectively (approximately 0.06 and 0.19 miles).
With a model that could predict every likely Uber ride request in a given day, we were able to leverage the information in a way that would benefit the rider, the driver, and the environment. We subdivided the land area into 33,490 0.25-mile “bins” (170 latitude-wise by 197 longitude-wise). Then, given a time-of-day and day-of-week, we looked at which “bin” each predicted ride request within a 5-minute period would fall into, incrementing the bin’s ride count for each predicted ride. Bins with a ride count five standard deviations above the mean were designated as “hotspots” for the given 5-minute period, meaning they are highly likely to experience multiple Uber ride requests.
With the information of the current/upcoming hotspots, the benefits are three-fold. The user can walk to the location of the nearest hotspot to them to minimize time waiting for the Uber, as well as the extra cost of driving that distance; the driver’s time and gas spent picking up the next rider is lowered, optimizing their service by maximizing time spent driving passengers; and most importantly, unnecessary carbon emissions are reduced by chipping off an auxiliary part of the Uber commute. On the scale of Uber, which handles millions of rides per year, this effect would accumulate manifold.
